The President:
It was little more than one year ago that our country faced a
potentially devastating
crisis in our auto industry.
Over the course of 2008, the
industry shed 400,000 jobs.
In the midst of a financial
crisis and deep recession,
both General Motors
and Chrysler --
two companies that for
generations were a symbol of
America's manufacturing might -- were on the brink of collapse.
The rapid dissolution
of these companies --
followed by the certain failure
of many auto parts makers,
and car dealers, and
other small businesses --
would have dealt a crippling
blow to our already suffering economy.
The best estimates are that
more than one million American
workers could have
lost their jobs.
The previous administration
extended temporary loans to both companies.
Even so, when I took office,
the situation remained dire.
We had to determine whether or
not we could justify additional
taxpayer assistance.
After all, many of the problems
in the auto industry were a
direct result of poor management
decisions over decades.
So it wasn't an easy call.
But we decided that while
providing additional assistance
was a risk, the far greater risk
to families and communities
across our country
was to do nothing.
We agreed to additional help,
but only if the companies and
their stakeholders were willing
to break with the past.
They had to fundamentally
reorganize,
with new management that would
reexamine the decisions that led
to this mess and chart
a path toward viability.
I knew this wasn't
a popular decision.
But it was the right one.
So, GM and Chrysler went through
painful restructurings: ones
that required enormous
sacrifices on the part of all involved.
Many believed this
was a fool's errand.
Many feared we would be throwing
good money after bad: that
taxpayers would lose most of
their investment and that these
companies would soon
fail regardless.
But one year later, the
outlook is very different.
In fact, the industry is
recovering at a pace few thought possible.
Just this week we received
some encouraging news.
Since General Motors
emerged from bankruptcy,
the auto industry has
actually added 45,000 jobs --
the strongest
growth in a decade.
And Chrysler announced an
operating profit in the first
three months of this year.
This is the first time Chrysler
has reported a profit since the
beginning of the
economic crisis.
What's more, GM announced that
it paid back its loans to
taxpayers with interest, fully
five years ahead of schedule.
It won't be too long before the
stock the Treasury is holding in
GM can be sold, helping to
reimburse the American people
for their investment.
In addition, Chrysler Financial
has already fully repaid with
interest the loans it received
to support auto financing.
And we're closing the books
on the temporary program that
helped parts suppliers
weather this storm --
returning this investment to the
Treasury in full, with interest, as well.
Finally, we're bringing to
an end many of the emergency
programs designed to stabilize
the financial sector and restart
lending so folks could
finance cars and trucks --
as well as homes and
small businesses.
On Friday, in fact, the Treasury
Department informed Congress
that this financial rescue -- which was absolutely necessary
to prevent an even worse economic disaster --
will end up costing taxpayers a
fraction of what was originally feared.
This is a direct result of
the careful management of the
investments made by the American
people so that we could recoup
as many tax dollars as possible -- and as quickly as possible.
These steps, as well
as others we've taken,
have meant that millions of
people are working today who
might otherwise have
lost their jobs.
But these steps were never
meant to be permanent.
As I've said many times, I did
not run for president to get
into the auto business
or the banking business.
As essential as it
was that we got in,
I'm glad to see that
we're getting out.
At the same time, even as
we've come a long way,
we still have a ways to go.
The auto industry is
more stable today.
And the economy is
on a better footing.
But people are still hurting.
I hear from them just about
every day in letters I read and
in the towns and
cities that I visit.
No matter what the
economic statistics say,
I won't be satisfied until folks
who need work can find good jobs.
After a recession that
stole 8 million jobs,
this is gonna take some time.
And this will require that
we continue to tackle the
underlying problems that caused
this turmoil in the first place.
In short, it's essential that we
learn the lessons of this crisis
-- or we risk repeating it.
Now, part of what led to the
crisis in our auto industry --
and one of the main causes
of the economic downturn --
were problems in our
financial sector.
In the absence of
common-sense rules,
Wall Street firms took enormous,
irresponsible risks that
imperiled our
financial system --
and hurt just about every
sector of our economy.
Some people simply forgot that
behind every dollar traded or
leveraged, there is a family
looking to buy a house,
pay for an education,
open a business,
or save for retirement.
That's why I went to New York
City this week and addressed an
audience that included leaders
in the financial industry.
And once again I called for
reforms to hold Wall Street
accountable and to
protect consumers.
These reforms would put an
end -- once and for all --
to taxpayer bailouts.
They would bring greater
transparency to complex
financial dealings.
And they will empower ordinary
consumers and shareholders in
our financial system.
Folks will get clearer and more
concise information when they
make financial decisions -- instead of having to worry about
deceptive fine print.
And shareholders and pension
holders will have a stronger
voice in the boardrooms of
companies in which they invest
their savings.
That's how we'll restore trust
and confidence in our markets.
That's how we'll help to put an
end to the cycle of boom and
bust that we've seen.
And that's how -- after two
very difficult years --
we will not only
revive the economy,
but help to rebuild it
stronger than ever before.
Thanks.